---
layout: post
title: "Weaving"
author: "Isaac"
---

During the reseach for our group project I came across Alex McLeans PhD Thesis Artist-Programmers and Programming Languages for the arts. 
In this text he mentions the Jaquard Loom and how our computers evolved from the pattern punch cards made for looms to allow weaving of complex patterns. He also talks about how text itself comes from weaving metaphor.
>“An ancient metaphor: thought is a thread, and the raconteur is a spinner of yarns - but the true storyteller, the poet, is a weaver. The scribes made this old and audible abstraction into a new and visible fact. After long practice, their work took on such an even, flexible texture that they called the written pager a textus, which means cloth.” -Robert Bringhurst, The Elements of Typographic Style

In more recent work the [PENELOPE](http://penelope.hypotheses.org/) project has explored this idea of weaving programmers, as well as exploring the knot based notation [Quipu](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quipu). Quipu or 'talking knots' are historical methods of recoding numbers and stories in South America in the 17th Century. A type of dataset or way of recording events that seems very different from our text, but then so close when we consider the origins of text in fabric and texture. 

I make art of ideas that I am unable to speak. I am creating new languages in a work or an exhibition that attempt to say what I can't just sing. It seems natural for me to be researching computer programming languages and how they fit with my art. I feel slightly uncomfortable in coding artworks, yet there is something there which is really working for me. And when I reconsider myself as a weaver rather than a programmer it all makes a lot more sense. 

The PENELOPE project has been developing an physical live coding machine based around research into weaving. They have [overlayed their device with AR ](https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=1&v=pLpHBUmwGCk)to visualise the computing process happening for the live coder.
Here the coder is able to play and improvise their program into existance. 

Over the past few weeks I have been looking at many different programming languages and programming styles. Interpreted, compiled, funcitonal, object-oriented, and esoteric. I feel I have a much better understanding of the differences between languages, and visual languages have really grown on me. Originally they felt liek they were not real programming or something, and instead arranging things on a higher level was somehow avoiding the issue of the languages beneath, but I have come to really appreciate the playfulness of fluidity that higher level languages allow. I am excited to explore how physical programming can work, especially with image recognition becoming much more developed and the possibility for augmented reality overlays, like the Penelope project are exploring.