# Proposal

1) Summarise your project in two lines
In this research project, I will look at emerging computer vision assisted programming environments, and discuss how we can recognise and embrace non-human actors as 'vital collaborators' of artistic practice.

2) What are the overarching area of research?
Computer Vision (object recognition), Artistic programming languages/environments

3) What are the key questions or queries you will address?
What are we choosing to see and not see with CV?  How can we use cv to create programming environments for the arts?

4) Why are you motivated to undertake this project?
I am interested in how we develop computer programming so that it allows for immediate, intuitive, improvisational, and collaborative uses of technology. I am interested in how we can experiment with programming to play, detour, and compose. I am interested in the disruption of control, the position of not knowing, as being necessary to finding new ways to that 'opaque centre' of art.

5) What theoretical frameworks will you use in your work to guide you?
I plan to approach this project using Actor-Network Theory.

6) What theoretical frameworks will you use in the analysis of your project?
I will use theory of the non-human turn and ubiquitous computing as ways of analysing this project.

7) How will you document your project?
I will document this project with a mixture of short writing and experimenting with 'computer-vision for artists' scripts.


8) Timeline for project milestones

WK1: Research existing Projects and play with CV 
WK2: A better understanding of Actor-Network theory
WK3: Draft out thoughts and code explorations
WK4: Analyse the work
WK5: Final Report




