# Notes For Essay

“Education of attention, attend to the things around us”
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xfvnt_wExbk


Both very well prepared and completely unprepared for what is to come

Human life is lived in the tension 


Graceful programming

Resistance and availability in different programming languages

Attraction to functional strong types languages. They are clear with where their resistance lies and their availability lies. 


Like Live music having this sense of involvement for the audience. More present more immanent, though people talk of concerts brings transcendent events. 

The coming “copernican trauma” of understanding intelligence. When we see we are not the center of the universe but an aspect of it. When our prime intelligence becomes just a version, a verse in a bigger song being improvised and already written. 

Topology
Topologically 


Notes for text. 
Flot and Knotomata

Stringular Braidomata

Flaid 
Plaid

Detours
Entanglements
Lines
Notation

How can we create programs which follow that path of familiarity and newness, of Jamais vu.

I began writing something quite different , and then found my self in a place of reflection. 

I instead started thinking about the work I have recently been making.

Making tools for making work.
(David kanega unity plugins for improvised game dev)

Lines paths detours.
Speculative grace, resistance and availability. 
Dynamic media.

Carving along the grain of the wood, with intention but also being resisted and pushed into where the grain goes.
Canoeing down a river.

Intimate, reflective, storytelling.

Nan shepherd.

Steph Davies hanging on a rope

Like being a Bird making a nest

Contours. On maps?
Finding contours in opencv.
John Berger on drawing.

My friend Niamh described him as “so logical but also mystical”


Being in the field and seeing and hearing the deer spring across in front of me. The loud feet, hitting the soil hard.

-   Whats the story?
- Why is it important?
- Why is it hard?
- What is my approach?
- 


