# Programming for children

It seems the programming langugages developed for children are more interesting? or more playful with how we represet state and data as it flows through a program.

I think it would be useful to bring the visualization into programming in general.
So talking about dynamic media, and using real physical objects and materials. 
What does the computer see, what materials and objects are recognised and given meaning. And what gets hidden (what gets to hide) what gets seen. 
In Reyner Banhams Scenes in America desert he talks about how the human objects in the vast nature are what we are drawn too. Why is that, there is so much to see yet we focus on the one street sign in a hundred miles, or the half collapsed shack. Not the dirt. 

Pattern recognition
Material recognition




In the preface to his influential book Mindstorms(1980), Seymour Papert explains his motivation to create smalltalk with his experience of playing with gears as a child. He explains how his playful involvement with toy gears provided him with a model with which to approach understanding new ideas presented to him. “I saw multiplication tables as gears, and my first brush with equations in two variables immediately evoked the differential. By the time I had made a mental gear model of the relation between x and y, figuring how many teeth each gear needed, the equation had become a comfortable friend.” This observation is an example of how we can understand abstract ideas by placing them inside things we already understand. 

Programming is generating processes. We write down a way to do something


Smalltalk, the second most loved programming language (2017 stack overflow)

“Methods discovered in one medium provide metaphors which contribute new ways to think about notions in other media”(http://www.newmediareader.com/book_samples/nmr-26-kay.pdf)






Papert, S. (1980) Mindstorms. Children, Computers and Powerful Ideas. Basic Books. New York.

https://insights.stackoverflow.com/survey/2017#technology-most-loved-dreaded-and-wanted-languages





Paper Signals
There is a desire across many of these projects to bring computational processes into a physical, but temporary/playful, state. The google project paper signals is another example of this. They demo the use of their voice api by providing a template for simple paper constructions which are assembled with an Arduino and a small motor to provide visualisations of the requested information. 
Something I like about this is the simple construction, the objects can be printed onto a sheet of paper, which is something that is so tempting to play with and at a very small cost. You can go wrong and only need to print another, and that availability of the medium allows for more experimentation.
Similarly another google project, this time demoing ARCore, shows how patterns can be printed to paper, assembled into boxes and then ‘come to life’ with a smartphone which overlays the camera image with animations that interact with the boxes deepening on the pattern they show. One box generates a stick figure, another tells it to jump, another to walk to the left etc. This allows the construction of animations, and an explanation of how a programming language executes. 
Things you can signal:
- Weather
- Money
- Time
- Rockets



littlebits is a company that develops small modular circuitry, that is connected with magnets allowing for quick assemblages of inputs and outputs. A collaboration with korg led to the development of a synthesiser  kit, which contains oscillators filters modulators etc, these can be thrown together to find sounds and circuits that might otherwise not be found, it allows for you to try something out without knowing if it will work and, again due to its availability and immediacy, it encourages experimentation…


The Color Code project led by Eric Rosenbaum ‘is a set of experiments, with Jay Silver, in using the colors of everyday objects to control things on a computer.’
Using computer vision they detect a persons interaction with different coloured objects. This is quite simple and not 


EverythingMachines is an iOS app which uses a simple programming language and a circuit like interface to allow the users to connect the sensors of their device together in experimental ways. 
I like the app, but it lags the possibilities of physical medium for exploring what computing could be. I can’t tear it in half, or inflate it. I can run it under a tap or freeze it. 



Block based programming - visualizing code but not the data? 
Their is a trend that can be seen in the development of programming languages for education for children to use a Block  like language. But this doesn’t really get at what Seymour paper explained with his understanding of gears allowing him a way to understand the process taking place. 

PROGRAMMING WITH AR

Littlebits korg synth
https://www.ericrosenbaum.com/color-code/
https://projectbloks.withgoogle.com/
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=arOEUVO1rIw
https://harc.ycr.org/reports/
https://papersignals.withgoogle.com/#

Why are the most interesting programming languages for children>

